So far, all of the state that we've been
dealing with has been state that belongs
to specific components.
And if we need to pass it around
between components, then we use props,
and we use bindings and we use events.
But that's not always what you want.
Sometimes you have state that doesn't
really belong to a specific component.
Sometimes it's global state,
like an object representing
the current user and things like that.
And we need to have a way of representing
those outside the components.
And for
that we have the concept of stores.
The store is pretty simple.
It's just an object with
a subscribe method.
And it's not even Svelte specific.
It's something that you could use
in any application, as we'll see.
But it does have a specific
importance to Svelte.
So here's our file, stores.js.
We're importing writable
from Svelte/Store.
Not the main Svelte package, but
the the Svelte/Store package,
which is one of a number of packages
that live inside the Svelte namespace.
And then we're initializing it with 0,
and that becomes our count store.
And then we're importing that count store
into each of these components' app.
Decrementer, incrementer, and resetter.
And as the name suggests, the job of each
of these components is to increment,
decrement, or
reset the value of that store.
So inside the increment, the component.
Let's change the value of
the store by calling count.update
And then we're gonna pass in a handler
that takes the current value and
returns the new value.
That's the job of the update method.
And now when I click the + button,
the value of the count increases.
And the way that we're getting that
value into App is by subscribing to it.
So here we're declaring count value.
And then we're calling count.subscribe,
and giving it a callback.
Which takes the value, the current
value which is the callback that runs
every time the value of count changes,
as well as when you first subscribe to it.
And then it's passing that
value back up to count value,
which is then referenced
inside the marker.
And so that's how clicking this button
affects the contents of the h1.
And if you thinking, that's quite a lot
of boilerplate, you're not wrong.
And we're gonna get to that.
We're gonna wire up the decrementer first.
Same thing, count, update, n, n -1.
And now we can press the + button and
the- button.
Finally, in the re-setter,
we don't care about the current value,
we're always just gonna set it
back to zero, so count.set0.
Okay, so that works.
But there's actually a subtle
bug in this application.
And the bug is that we're generating this
unsubscribe function, which is the result
of calling count.subscribe, but
it never gets called anywhere.
Now one way that we could fix that is to
use the on destroy life cycle function.
And inside on destroy,
We'll call unsubscribe.
In that way,
we're not gonna have any memory leaks if
there are lots of these components and
they've been created and destroyed, all of
our subscribers are gonna be torn down.
But look at all this code.
It's quite a lot for
what we're trying to do.
So Svelte has a trick up its sleeve.
Because we have this fixed store contract.
By which I mean the subscribe method.
We can reference a store value
by prefixing the store name with
the dollar symbol.
And we can just get rid of all of this
code here, get rid of the on destroy.
Get rid of the count value,
get rid of the count.subscribe.
Just take that store and
prefix it with the dollar.
And it works exactly the same way,
under the hood, Svelte is creating that
subscriber the same way that
you would have done manually,
except that it's always gonna clean
it up when it's no longer valid.
There are some caveats about
how this syntax sugar works and
they're detailed in this section here.
So that was the writable store.
There are some stores that you don't
need to be able to set the value of or
it doesn't make sense to
set the value of them.
You might have a store
representing the mouse position or
a store representing
the user's geolocation.
And those are read only, essentially.
So this time in our stores.js tab, we're
importing readable instead of writable.
And we're creating a store called Time,
has no initial value currently.
And we haven't implemented
the function that gets called when
we first subscribe to the store,
so let's do that now.
First argument is the initial value,
new date.
I saw the time is 12:40:53, where I am.
And when we first subscribe to this store,
which is already happening because
we're referencing it inside our
app.svelte with dollar time.
We can create an interval.
It's gonna run once every second, And
it's gonna set the current
value to a new Date object.
And then once everything is unsubscribed
to this store, we can clean that up.
So we're gonna return a function
that calls clear interval, and
then we pass in the interval.
And so now we have this time store
that is just gonna keep ticking up as
long as anyone is interested in it.
And that can be shared between
as many components as you want.
Finally, we have derived stores which
are stores whose value is
derived from other stores.
Be they readable or writable or
even other derived stores.
So taking the previous example, we wanna
have a store that represents the number of
seconds that the page has been open.
And we already have our time store setup.
We just need to implement the App Store.
And so, we're importing
derived alongside readable.
And the first argument to
this function is a store.
And the second argument is a callback
that takes the current store value and
turns it into something else.
So we're gonna take math.round, And
then we'll take the current time.
Subtract that from the start time
when this module was first evaluated.
And then we'll divide it by 1000.
And so now you can see that the store
representing the number of seconds elapsed
since the page is opened.
Updates in sync with the store
representing the current time.
Now, you can derive a store
from multiple input stores, and
you can explicitly set a value instead of
just returning it, like we're doing here.
That's a little bit more involved.
So if that's something that you need to
do, then consult the API documentation.
Which you can find up here, this link
in the nav, next to the tutorial.